.TH AEGIS-BOOT 1 "2026-04-17" "aegis-boot 0.13.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
aegis-boot \- signed-chain-preserving USB-boot-stick builder and operator CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aegis-boot
.I subcommand
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ arguments ]
.PP
.B aegis-boot
.BR \-\-version | \-\-help
.RI [ \-\-json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B aegis-boot
builds USB sticks that boot under enforcing UEFI Secure Boot without disabling
or bypassing it. The toolchain is: signed shim \[->] signed GRUB \[->] signed
kernel \[->] initramfs \[->]
.BR rescue-tui (1)
\[->]
.BR kexec_file_load (2)
into an operator-selected ISO. Unlike other multi-ISO USB tools,
.B aegis-boot
never installs a "trust the whole stick" MOK, so the chain of trust the
firmware vendor shipped with the machine is preserved end to end.
.PP
Every flash produces a signed JSON attestation manifest capturing the host
workstation state, target device GUID, image SHA-256, and operator identity.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
Each subcommand accepts
.B \-\-help
for full per-command usage. Read-mostly subcommands accept
.BR \-\-json
for stable machine-readable output (schema_version=1).
.TP
.B init \fR[\fIdevice\fR] [\-\-profile \fINAME\fR] [\-\-yes]
One-command rescue stick. Composes
.BR doctor ", " flash ", " fetch ", " add
in sequence for every ISO in the named profile. Profiles:
.BR panic-room " (default — Alpine + Ubuntu Server + Rocky 9, ~5 GiB),"
.BR minimal " (Alpine only),"
.BR server " (Ubuntu Server + Rocky + AlmaLinux, ~6 GiB)."
.TP
.B flash \fR[\fIdevice\fR] [\-\-yes]
Write the signed boot image to a USB stick. Auto-detects a single removable
drive if no device is given. Requires a typed
.B flash
confirmation unless
.B \-\-yes
is set.
.TP
.B list \fR[\fIdevice\fR] [\-\-json]
Show ISOs on the stick with per-file SHA-256 verdict and attestation summary.
.TP
.B add \fIiso\fR [\fIdevice\fR]
Copy and validate an ISO onto the stick. Preserves
.BR .sha256 ", " SHA256SUMS ", and " minisig
sidecars when found.
.TP
.B doctor \fR[\-\-stick \fIdevice\fR] [\-\-json]
Health check the host workstation and (optionally) a stick. Prints a 0–100
score, per-row verdicts, and a single
.B NEXT ACTION
line on any failure. On Linux also surfaces
.B machine identity
from
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/*
and cross-checks against the compat database.
.TP
.B recommend \fR[\fIslug\fR] [\-\-json] [\-\-slugs-only]
Curated catalog of known-good ISOs with project-signed SHA256SUMS.
.TP
.B fetch \fIslug\fR \fR[\-\-out \fIdir\fR] [\-\-no-gpg] [\-\-dry-run]
Download + GPG-verify an ISO from the catalog.
.TP
.B attest \fR{list|show} [\-\-json]
List or inspect attestation receipts for past flashes.
.TP
.B eject \fR[\fIdevice\fR]
Sync and power-off a stick before physical removal.
.TP
.B update \fIdevice\fR \fR[\-\-json]
Check eligibility for a non-destructive signed-chain rotation. Exit 0 if
eligible (prints host-chain preview), exit 1 otherwise (prints reason).
.TP
.B verify \fR[\fIdevice\fR] [\-\-json]
Re-run SHA-256 verification on every ISO on the stick. Each ISO resolves to
one of:
.BR Verified ", " Mismatch ", " Unreadable ", or " NotPresent .
.TP
.B compat \fR[\fIquery\fR] [\-\-my-machine] [\-\-json]
Look up a machine in the in-binary hardware compatibility database. Fuzzy
matches vendor+model;
.B \-\-my-machine
auto-fills the query from DMI (Linux only).
.TP
.B completions \fR{bash|zsh}
Emit a shell completion script to stdout. See
.B INSTALLATION
below.
.TP
.B tour
Print a 30-second in-terminal walkthrough showing the 4-command path from
a fresh install to a working rescue stick. Pointers to
.I docs/HOW_IT_WORKS.md
and
.I docs/TOUR.md
for the conceptual and step-by-step guides.
.SH INSTALLATION
Install the binary via the cosign-verified one-liner:
.PP
.RS
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/williamzujkowski/aegis-boot/main/scripts/install.sh | sh
.RE
.PP
Or via Homebrew:
.PP
.RS
brew tap williamzujkowski/aegis-boot https://github.com/williamzujkowski/aegis-boot
.br
brew install aegis-boot
.RE
.PP
Install shell completions:
.PP
.RS
aegis-boot completions bash | sudo tee /etc/bash_completion.d/aegis-boot
.br
aegis-boot completions zsh > ~/.zsh/completions/_aegis-boot
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B AEGIS_ISO_ROOTS
Colon-separated directory list
.BR rescue-tui (1)
scans for
.B .iso
files. Default:
.I /run/media:/mnt
.TP
.B AEGIS_THEME
Color theme for
.BR rescue-tui (1):
.BR default ", " monochrome ", " high-contrast ", " okabe-ito " (colorblind-safe), or " aegis " (brand)."
Also settable via
.I aegis.theme=NAME
on the kernel command line.
.TP
.B AEGIS_A11Y
When set to
.B 1
or when
.B TERM=dumb
is exported, skips the ratatui alt-screen and renders a numbered-menu
text-mode interface. State transitions still emit
.B ANN:
lines to stderr for screen-reader consumption.
.TP
.B AEGIS_AUTO_KEXEC
Substring match; the first matching ISO is kexec'd without operator
confirmation. Intended for automated lab boot; not for production use.
.TP
.B AEGIS_LOG_JSON
When set, switches
.BR tracing (3rs)
output to JSON for
.I journalctl --output=json
consumption.
.TP
.B AEGIS_BOOT_VERBOSE
When set, captures
.I /init
output to
.I /var/log/aegis-boot.log
on the AEGIS_ISOS partition for post-reboot diagnostics.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I AEGIS_ISOS
FAT32 (or ext4) partition 2 on every aegis-boot stick; contains the ISOs
plus their verification sidecars and per-flash attestation manifests.
.TP
.I /etc/bash_completion.d/aegis-boot
System-wide bash completion. Generated by
.BR "aegis-boot completions bash" .
.TP
.I $XDG_DATA_HOME/aegis-boot/attestations/
Local attestation receipts (one JSON per flash), indexed by target device
GUID and timestamp.
.TP
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/*
Sysfs DMI fields read by
.B doctor
to surface machine identity and by
.B "compat --my-machine"
to auto-fill queries. Non-privileged read.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Subcommand-specific failure — see the subcommand's
.B \-\-help
for meaning.
.BR doctor ", " update ", and " verify
use 1 to signal "at least one FAIL check" /
"stick is ineligible" / "mismatch or unreadable ISO present" respectively.
.BR compat
returns 1 on a DB miss (not an error — DB is incomplete by design).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (unknown subcommand, unknown flag, conflicting flags, missing
required argument).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rescue-tui (1),
.BR kexec_file_load (2),
.BR mokutil (1),
.BR sgdisk (8)
.PP
Full documentation at:
.I https://github.com/williamzujkowski/aegis-boot/tree/main/docs
.PP
Compatibility reports:
.I https://github.com/williamzujkowski/aegis-boot/blob/main/docs/HARDWARE_COMPAT.md
.SH BUGS
Report bugs via
.I https://github.com/williamzujkowski/aegis-boot/issues
using the bug or hardware-report template. Security-sensitive findings go
through the private path documented in
.IR SECURITY.md .
.SH AUTHORS
William Zujkowski and the aegis-boot contributors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Dual-licensed MIT / Apache 2.0. See
.I LICENSE-MIT
and
.I LICENSE-APACHE
in the source tree.
